\chapter{The Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider}

\section{Overview}
While there have been many experiments which have performed deep inelastic
scattering over the years, the experiments built around the Relativistic Heavy
Ion Collider at Brookhaven National Laboratory are positioned to take advantage
of the unique accelerator. 

\begin{figure}[ht]
  \centering
  \begin{subfigure}[b]{\textwidth}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=0.8\linewidth]{./figures/kiyoshi_tanida_rhic_schematic.png}
    \caption{Diagram of RHIC Accelerator Complex, (Figure from Kiyoshi Tanida)}
    \label{fig:rhic_schematic} 
  \end{subfigure}
  \begin{subfigure}[b]{\textwidth}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=0.8\linewidth]{./figures/7979381212_fddf3f1ab4_z.jpg}
    \caption{Aerial photograph of RHIC Complex \cite{BNLFlickr2011}}
    \label{fig:rhic_aerial}
  \end{subfigure}
  \caption{
    A diagram of the acceleration process of RHIC is shown in the top panel, and
    aerial view is on bottom. RHIC is nearly four miles in circumference and
    collides a variety of ions at center-of-mass energies between $62 GeV$ and
    $510 GeV$.
  }
  \label{fig:rhic_complex}
\end{figure}

The Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) is the world's only intersecting ring
particle accelerator which is capable of producing polarized proton beams. The
beams are differentiated with the mnemonic "Blue" and "Yellow" beam. The Blue
beam circulates clockwise when viewed from above the RHIC complex, the Yellow
beam circulates counter-clockwise. As is typical for intersecting ring
experiments, the beams are bunched, with bunches of ions intersecting at
designated intersection points, around which experiments are built. The Blue
beam is nominally used to time these collisions, such that experiments which
have bunch-sensitive measurements (i.e. any experiment where bunch polarization
is important) can associate the correct punch polarization with the correct
collision. This will be discussed more in the section of beam-polarization
(\ref{sec:beam_polarization}).

RHIC generally separates data taking into beam 'fills' which are uniquely
numbered, and for which general data characterizing the machine state is logged
in various databases and online logbooks. Each fill is a unique population of
beam ions, circulating around the RHIC rings. The beam ions are subdivided into
discrete collections of ions called bunches. At the end of each fill, (typically
8 hours of collisions), the beam is dumped, and a new fill is generated.
Experiments built around RHIC generally subdivide fills into 'runs', where a run
is a period of time where the experiment is taking data. At PHENIX, runs are
always segregated within a fill - no run will ever contain data from multiple
fills.

Scientists at RHIC have come up with many ingenious ways to create and maintain
beam polarization, once this is accomplished, various kinematically select
probes are engineered, based on collisions observed which provide important
cross-checks to DIS data as well as original discoveries and measurements of
proton structure. RHIC is a unique collider in that it is quite flexible. Beams
may be transversely or longitudinally polarized, a variety of ions may be used
to fill the beams. To date, RHIC has collided many beam ions and species,
summarized in Figure~\ref{fig:rhic_early_run_summary} and
Figure~\ref{fig:rhic_late_run_summary}.

RHIC is an experiment which has been built on top of previous accelerator
experiments which have been reused magnificently - a Linear Accelerator, a
booster ring, and an Alternating Gradient Synchrotron, all of which now have
been repurposeed to create a high quality collider physics experiment. Many
experiments are still set up around various egress points along the acceleration
chain, which are publicised on the Brookhaven National Laboratory website
\url{www.bnl.gov}

\begin{figure}[ht]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.8\linewidth]{./figures/rhic_early_run_summary.png}
  \caption{ 
    Runs 1 - 3 at RHIC focused on commissioning work for experiments measuring
    collisions at RHIC. Work was mostly characterized by heavy-ion measurements
    related to understanding Quark-Gluon Plasma. The spin program began with Run
    5. Table produced from data posted at the RHIC run page \cite{Fischer2016}.
  }
  \label{fig:rhic_early_run_summary}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[ht]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.8\linewidth]{./figures/rhic_late_run_summary.png}
  \caption{ 
    Though RHIC is currently still running (as of May 9, 2016), I include runs
    here up to and including the run producing my data set (Run 13). An
    unprecedented 13.3 cryo-weeks of running was awarded to the W-Physics
    group.  Table produced from data posted at the RHIC run
    page \cite{Fischer2016}.
  }
  \label{fig:rhic_late_run_summary}
\end{figure}

At the time of writing of this thesis (Spring of 2016), there are two
experiments which are actively taking data from collisions produced by RHIC: The
Pioneering High Energy Nuclear Interaction Experiment (PHENIX,
Section~\ref{sec:PHENIX}, Figure~\ref{fig:phenix_and_star}), and the Solenoidal
Tracker at RHIC (STAR, Figure~\ref{fig:phenix_and_star}). STAR and PHENIX are
complimentary to each other - PHENIX has a very high precision centrally
covering Electromagnetic Calorimeter, and other high precision detectors, but
lacks full kinematic coverage, whereas STAR has lower precision, but has nearly
full kinematic coverage around the beam intersection at its center.

RHIC's luminosity and beam polarization has been continuously improving
(Figure~\ref{fig:rhic_luminosity}) since RHIC was first turned on. As we will
discuss later (\ref{sec:forward_upgrade}), this increased luminosity observed in
2013, was maximally leveraged with upgrades to the PHENIX detector.

\begin{figure}[ht]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.8\linewidth]{./figures/RhicLuminosityPP.png}
  \caption{
    Upgrades to RHIC's electron lens have enabled massive improvements to
    luminosity - seen in the year 2013. The high luminosity was taken advantage
    of with an extra long proton+proton run. Figure obtained from
     \cite{Fischer2016}
  }
  \label{fig:rhic_luminosity}
\end{figure}


\clearpage

\subsection{Experimental Apparatus}

\begin{figure}[ht]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{./figures/rhic_graphics_fig2-hr.jpg}
  \caption{
    STAR (a) and PHENIX (b) with cutaways showing the event display for a
    heavy-ion collision as reconstructed by the detectors' electromagnetic
    calorimeters~\cite{Walsh2012}.
  }
  \label{fig:phenix_and_star}
\end{figure}

RHIC accelerates ions in a multi-stage process, summarized in
Figure~\ref{fig:rhic_complex}. The first stop is the \textbf{Electron Beam Ion
Source}, built on top of a $200 MeV$ linear accelerator (Linac). Once ions are
injected into the Linac, they travel to the $Booster Synchrotron$.  At this
stage, ions are accelerated with pulsed RF fields. Once the beam of ions has
been accelerated to nearly the speed of light, they are fed into the
\textbf{Alternating Gradient Synchrotron} or AGS. At this time, ions are
traveling at about 0.37~$c$. By the time the ions leave the AGS, they are moving
at 0.997~$c$. Once the ions are ready, they are transferred to the
\textbf{AGS-to-RHIC Line}, where a switching magnet pumps bunches of ions into
either the counterclockwise circulating ring of RHIC, or the clockwise
circulating ring of RHIC. The ions are 'spun-up' here to maximum speed, and are
accelerated around the RHIC complex - each beam-ion travels nearly 2.4 miles in
microseconds, for the duration of a physics-fill~\cite{RHIC2016}.

When the RHIC rings are filled with ions, the ions are bunched into rotating
electromagnetic potentials called 'buckets'. There are 360 beam-buckets in
total, but typically only a fraction are filled with ions. For this analysis, we
took data with beams with 110 filled buckets. The sequence of beam buckets from
one bunch to the next is referred to as a 'bunch' - and are rather long -
Figure~\ref{fig:bunch_profile_overlay}. A detailed presentation of beam dynamics
with regards to luminosity will be presented in chapter
\ref{ch:vernier_analysis}.

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.7\linewidth]{./figures/wcm_16587.jpeg}
  \caption{
    Plot courtesy of Angelika Drees, of RHIC's Collider-Accelerator 
    department. The blue beam (blue) and yellow beam (yellow) are overlaid over
    a 40 nanosecond time period. Even with bunches crossing a fixed point over
    40 nanoseconds, this still corresponds to an overall bunch length of about
    12 meters. Conversely, the bunch width is quite narrow - with Gaussian
    geometry, it is between 150 millimeters and 300 millimeters depending on the
    beam energy. Understanding the beam bunch geometry is a crucial component to
    understanding total the total luminosity delivered by RHIC to PHENIX.
  }
  \label{fig:bunch_profile_overlay}
\end{figure}

\clearpage
\section{Production of Polarized Proton Beams}

The production of polarized beams is crucial to the physics of this measurement
- without polarized beams, no spin structure analysis can be done at RHIC. This
is due to the fact that the helicity state of the protons in the initial state
of any proton proton collision can be connected to the final observed states in
a way which provides information about the spin structure function, as was
discussed in section \ref{ch:modeling_proton_spin}. 

The production of polarized beams is a multistage process, and involves several
experimental components. The importance of polarizing the beams is fully
realized once polarized beams are collided at relatively high center of mass
energies - where the beams behave less like polarized proton beams, but more
like polarized beams of quarks and gluons \cite{Alekseev2003}.  Beam
polarization is achieved incrementally - with polarization starting as soon as
the booster and AGS stage of the acceleration process \ref{fig:rhic_complex}.

The RHIC Configuration Manual \cite{RHIC2006} provides a wealth of information,
accelerator physics, diagrams, equations, and descriptions of the extremely
precise and comprehensive approach to creating polarized proton beams and
injecting them into RHIC. This work was crucial to this section of my thesis,
and is recommended reading for anyone who wishes to know 'all the details' of
how RHIC handles polarized beams.

\subsection{Polarized Injection}

RHIC uses an optically pumped polarized ion source (OPPIS),
Figure~\ref{fig:rhic_oppis} to produce a polarized ion source greatly in excess
of RHIC's design intensity. This is used to our advantage, as the emittance of
the beam can be lowered to create a highly collimated beam for physics use.

\begin{figure}[ht]
	\centering
	\includegraphics[width=0.8\linewidth]{./figures/rhic_oppis.png}
	\caption{
		RHIC's optically pumped polarized ion source. Produces 0.5-1.0 mA current of
		polarized $H^-$ ions. The optical pumping is pulsed at 400
		$\mu$s, \cite{Zelenski2007}
	}
	\label{fig:rhic_oppis}
\end{figure}

\clearpage
\subsection{AGS to RHIC Transfer Line}

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \begin{subfigure}[b]{\textwidth}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=0.7\linewidth]{./figures/rhic_polarized_injector.png}
		\caption{
			Technical schematic of Polarized Injection Line \cite{Zelenski2007}
		}
    \label{fig:polarized_top_view_1} 
  \end{subfigure}
  \begin{subfigure}[b]{\textwidth}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=0.7\linewidth]{./figures/polarized_beam_rhic_complex.png}
		\caption{
			Overhead view of Polarized Injection Line \cite{RHIC2006}
		}
    \label{fig:polarized_top_view_2}
  \end{subfigure}
  \caption{
		A view of the RHIC polarized injection system. We see a zoomed in technical
		view of the OPPIS to the booster (a), below, we see a zoomed out cartoon of
		the next step in the polarization injection system, including the AGS, and
		the feeder line to RHIC.
  }
  \label{fig:rhic_polarized_beam_line}
\end{figure}

Once ions have been optically pumped, we have a direct-current beam at
approximately 80\% polarization. The pumping is accomplished using Rubidium
vapor. The polarized ions are then moved into the booster from the Linac, where
some polarization is lost to spin precession, intrinsic to accelerating charged
ions in a circular path. However, polarization is maintained, for the most part,
by matching the precession resonance to the orbiting frequency of the booster
ring. The Siberian snakes and spin rotators at this stage serve to incrementally
flip the ion spin such that the natural depolarization works to re-polarize the
orbiting ions, every full-turn. The full details of this procedure are well
described in \cite{RHIC2006}.

After the ions are sufficiently polarized and filled in the AGS, they are moved
into the AGS to RHIC Transfer line, Figure~\ref{fig:ags_to_rhic}. The beam is
focused and fed through a switching magnet - which must be timed with great
precision in order to fill the blue and yellow beams with the appropriate
polarization patters. In fact, the precision is so great, that the earth's
curvature must be taken into account over this relatively short injection line -
the entry point and exit point are bent ever slow slightly different - the entry
being 12.51 mrad, vs the egress being 12.46 mrad \cite{RHIC2006}. At the point
of injection in the transfer line, the beam size and emittance are measured, as
well as the beam polarization. 

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.6\linewidth]{./figures/ags_to_rhic_transfer}
  \caption{
    A schematic of the geometry of the AGS-to-RHIC transfer line~\cite{RHIC2006}.
  }
  \label{fig:ags_to_rhic}
\end{figure}

\clearpage
\section{Maintaining Beam Polarization}
\label{sec:beam_polarization}

The creation of polarized beams is only half the battle. Depolarizing resonances
in any particle beam are intrinsic in the design of any circulating beam
particle accelerator - without intervention, after a few rotations, RHIC's
polarized beams would be unpolarized. RHIC uses several strategies in concert to
correct for the largest of these depolarizing resonances - including beam orbit
corrections, the Siberian Snakes, Betatron Tune Spreading, and sextupole
magnetic depolarizing resonances. 

\subsection{Siberian Snakes and Spin Rotators}

The Siberian Snakes are positioned at two locations on the RHIC ring (as well as
others along the injection sequence). The most stable configuration of spin
injected in RHIC is such that the spin axis is perpendicular to the plane of the
accelerator ring. The Siberian snake is a helical magnet which forces the spin
to rotate 180 degrees every half rotation. This special configuration of snakes
(see Figure~\ref{fig:rhic_complex}) ingeniously takes advantage of the
rotational precision of the spin (a depolarizing resonance) to re-polarize the
beam, every half-orbit.

The spin rotators are located outside of experimental interaction regions around
PHENIX and STAR. These special dipole magnets rotate the spin of the beams onto
a longitudinal (parallel with beam) axis - these magnets are important for any
measurement (such as this one) requiring longitudinal spin polarization.
Otherwise, transverse spin effects can by studied.

\subsection{Measuring Beam Polarization}

The RHIC Collider-Accelerator Department provides several means of measuring the
beam polarization over the course of the data taking period. PHENIX takes
special data and studies it, to determine the real beam polarization delivered
to the detector, in a yearly analysis (for years where polarized data is taken).
This analysis is often called "Local Polarimetry", but is often abbreviated as
LPol in PHENIX logs.

CAD will additionally measure polarization in via inelastic proton-carbon
scattering in the Coulomb-Nuclear Interference (CNI) region. Relative
polarization can be determined with to within 10\% in only a few seconds of
measurement. 

Vertical polarization is determined through the calculation of the left and
right particle production, with a known analyzing power (\cite{RHIC2006}, Ch 8):

\begin{equation}
  P_B = {{1}\over{A_p}}{{N_L-N_R}\over{N_L+N_R}}
  \label{eq:rhic_polarization}
\end{equation}

Where $P_B$ is the beam polarization, $N_L$ and $N_R$ are the left-scattering
produced particles, and right-scattering produced particles and $A_p$ is the
analyzing power, which can be calculated from first principals, and
experimentally verified. Scattering takes place as a carbon filament is swept
across the beam.

As many decisions are financially constrained, this one was too. Using a
p-Carbon CNI polarimeter provides an economically viable way to measure beam
polarization within the precision needed for the spin experiments.

\subsubsection{The Spin Monitor}
\label{sec:the_spin_monitor}

One of my major contributions to the PHENIX experiment was in the upkeep and
development of the spin monitoring systems for the online data taking portions
of the experiment.

During a RHIC run, it is crucial to keep track of the polarization patterns
being collided at the PHENIX IR~\ref{fig:phenix_spin_collision}

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{./figures/phenix_spin_collision}
  \caption{
    As beams are longitudinally rotated into position for collision, it is
    crucial to keep careful track of the magnet currents rotating the beams, as
    well as the overall polarization pattern. Shown is a carton of one potential
    polarization pattern.
  }
  \label{fig:phenix_spin_collision}
\end{figure}


\clearpage
\section{The Pioneering High Energy Nuclear Interaction Experiment}
\label{sec:PHENIX}
\subsection{Overview}

The Pioneering High Energy Nuclear Interaction Experiment is a synthesis of many
smaller detectors all of whom were commissioned for various physics goals, some
of which have been repurposeed from their original application once the primary
physics mission of the detectors were completed.

The configuration of the PHENIX spectrometer can be changed from year to year,
depending on the analysis needs of the physics working groups. The configuration
of the detector for the 2013 physics run is shown in
Figure~\ref{fig:phenix_2013_config}.

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \begin{subfigure}[t]{\textwidth}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=0.8\linewidth]{./figures/phenix_2013_config_central_arms}
    \caption{Central Arms}
    \label{fig:phenix_central} 
  \end{subfigure} 
  \begin{subfigure}[t]{\textwidth}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=0.8\linewidth]{./figures/phenix_2013_config_muon_arms}
    \caption{Forward Muon Arms}
    \label{fig:phenix_forward}
  \end{subfigure}
  \caption{
    Shown: The two main halves of the PHENIX Spectrometer. The central arms are
    shown via the beam-on view of PHENIX (left) and Forward Muon Arms are shown
    via the 90-degree rotated view. In both cases, the 2013 configuration is
    shown. The beams are brought into intersection at the geometric center of
    each figure (immediately between the BBCs)
  }
  \label{fig:phenix_2013_config}
\end{figure}

PHENIX makes use of many classic detector technologies, it contains \v{C}erenkov
light detectors, resistive plate chambers, electromagnetic calorimeters, silicon
chip detectors, time of flight detectors, scintillation light detectors, cathode
strip chambers, and proportional tube counters.

While all of these subsystems are interesting, and have produced excellent
physics results, I will focus only on those pertinent to this analysis.

PHENIX is generally thought of as two 'halves', which often are used in separate
analyses - the forward muon arms, and the central arms. While both halves are
used for both heavy ion, and spin physics analyses, this analysis exclusively
uses the forward muon arms, so the central arms will not be discussed (though, a
closely related analysis, dealing with $A_L$ for $W\rightarrow e$ exclusively
uses the central arms). The different subsystems cover different rapidity
ranges, so many times, complimentary results are obtained from central and
forward analysis. Results from such a complementary central analysis will be
presented alongside my results in later chapters.

PHENIX also utilizes a complex data acquisition system (DAQ) which streams data
from each detector, assembles this data into a labeled event, compresses and
stores into a proprietary storage format, the work-flow of this is summarized in
Figure~\ref{fig:phenix_daq_overview}. A complete summary of PHENIX detector
subsystems (excluding the Forward Vertex Detector, Silicon Vertex Detector, and
Resistive Plate Chambers, which are new, and discussed separately) can by found
in Table~\ref{tab:phenix_detector_summary}.

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{./figures/daq_overview}
  \caption{ 
    A flow chart summarizing the PHENIX DAQ \cite{Desmond2016}. From left to
    right, we can get a feel for the data flow at PHENIX. Shown is an event, the
    red splat on the far left. Particles from this event are transduced by a
    detector ('A Sub System'). The transduced signals are serialized into a
    detector specific data stream, such that the state of the detector's
    excitation can be recorded and reproduced later. This information is stored
    on the front-end-electronics modules (FEMs), and synchronized with timing
    information from the clock (ticks once every time there is a bunch crossing)
    and a Global Trigger decision, i.e. whether or not the right parts of the
    detector lit up to make this particular event worth keeping. After this, if
    the event is deigned by the heuristics to be worthy of keeping, the
    uncompressed serialized information is sent to the DCMs, where it is
    assembled into a packet, and then sent to the event builder (EvB), where all
    packets sharing a common collision are assembled into an event. The event is
    compressed into a proprietary PRDF format, and sent to the Buffer Boxes,
    which are a cache of high density local storage, which is later sent off to
    cold storage on magnetic tape drives.
  }
  \label{fig:phenix_daq_overview}
\end{figure}

\begin{table}
  \centering
  \begin{tabular}{l c c p{0.3\linewidth}}
    \toprule
    \textbf{Element}	& \textbf{$\Delta\eta$}	& \textbf{$\Delta\phi$} & \textbf{Features} \\
    \midrule
    \textbf{Magnets} & & & \\
    Central Magent & $\pm 0.35$ & $360^{\circ}$ & 1.15 $T$ \\ 
    Muon Magnet North & $-1.1$ - $-2.2$ & $360^{\circ}$ & 0.72 $T$ \\
    Muon Magnet South & $1.1$ - $2.4$ & $360^{\circ}$ & 0.72 $T$ \\
    & & & \\
    \textbf{Minimum Bias} & & & \\
    Beam Beam Counter & $\pm(3.1-3.9)$ & $360^{\circ}$ & Vertex Reconstruction \\
    Zero Degree Calorimeter & $\pm 2 mrad$ & $360^{\circ}$ & Minimum Bias Trigger \\
    & & & \\
    \textbf{Central Detectors} & & & \\
    Drift Chambers & $\pm0.35$ & $90^{\circ}\times2$ & Central $p$ and $m$ resolution \\
    Pad Chambers & $\pm0.35$ & $90^{\circ}\times2$ & Pattern Recognition, Tracking \\
    Ring Imaging \v{C}erenkov & $\pm0.35$ & $90^{\circ}\times2$ & Electron ID \\
    Time of Flight & $\pm0.35$ & $45^{\circ}$ & Hadron ID, $\sigma<100pm$ \\
    PbSc EMCal & $\pm0.35$ & $90^{\circ}$ $45^{\circ}$ & Calorimetry, photon and electron energy \\
    PbGl EMCal & $\pm0.35$ & $45^{\circ}$ & $e^{\pm}$, $\mu^{\pm}$ separation at $p> 1 GeV/c$, EM Shower and $p < 0.35 GeV$, $K^{\pm}$, $\pi^{\pm}$ separation up to $1 GeV/c$ \\
    & & & \\
    \textbf{Muon Arms} & & & \\
    Muon Tracker South & -1.15 to -2.25 & $360^{\circ}$ & North installed 2003 \\
    Muon Tracker North & 1.15 to 2.44   & $360^{\circ}$ &  \\
    Muon ID South & -1.15 to -2.25 & $360^{\circ}$ & Steel absorbers, larocci tubes \\
    Muon ID North & 1.15 to 2.44   & $360^{\circ}$ & "" \\
    \bottomrule 
  \end{tabular}
  \caption{
    A summary of PHENIX hardware~\cite{Adcox2003}. Electron/pion separation and
    Pion/Kaon separation requires the Time of Flight (ToF) working with PbGl and
    PbSc data. PbGl refers to "Lead Glass Scintillator" and PbSc refers to "Lead
    Scintillator". The Muon Identifier (Muon ID, MuID) can help separate muons
    from hadrons. 
  }
  \label{tab:phenix_detector_summary}
\end{table}

\subsection{The Spin Program}
The PHENIX spin program was planned as part of the RHIC upgrade to produce
polarized proton beams. The major analysis thrust of the PHENIX spin program has
been to understand the spin structure of the proton, and has historically used
various flavors of particle production asymmetries (left-right and
forward-backward) as an experimental probe for polarized parton distribution
functions (as we saw in Chapter~\ref{ch:modeling_proton_spin}).

Much of PHENIX collaboration's early published work focused on creating and
studying quark gluon plasma in heavy ion collisions, but in following years spin
papers came too. Major question in physics that PHENIX set out to answer with
its heavy-ion program include studying confinement - i.e.  why are quark color
charges confined to exist in the nucleus, baryons and mesons? PHENIX sought to
study this via examination of the J/$Psi$ and measuring screening length in
heavy ion collisions. Additional research topics included the study of chiral
symmetry restoration, thermal radiation of hot gasses, QCD Phase transition,
Strangeness and Charm Production, Jet Quenching, and Space-time
evolution~\cite{Nagamiya1994} .

The spin program came shortly after the 2001 commissioning run. The first
polarized proton run was produced by RHIC for PHENIX in 2002, with 8.3 total
weeks of data, run discontinuously. The primary goals of the PHENIX spin
program are to study the polarization of the proton, specifically in the context
of the Ellis-Jaffe sum rule, which decomposes the proton spin into various
contributions from its substructure. The main structures studied by PHENIX are
the gluon polarization, $\Delta g$ and the anti-quark polarization, $\Delta
\bar{q}$. Additionally, the 'nature of parity non-conservation itself can be
directly studied' using polarized beams, and spin asymmetries in collisions.
Though this measurement generally requires a means of reconstructing jets
(PHENIX doesn't have this), inclusive or leading particle production can be used
as a substitute with some small asymmetry
remaining~\cite{PHENIXCollaboration1998}.

\subsection{Subsystems}

The major subsystems contributing to this work include the Muon Arms, the Beam
Beam Counters (BBCs), and the Forward Vertex Detector, since the analysis is
totally characterized with calculating the $A_L$ for $W\rightarrow\mu$
interactions, only muon reconstruction and identification is required. The
Central arms are used in the $W\rightarrow e$ analysis. 

\subsubsection{Beam Beam Counters}

The Beam-Beam counters (BBCs, Figure~\ref{fig:bbc_overview}) are photomultiplier
tubes with scintillating lead-glass crystals. These detectors are situated about
144 cm on either side of the nominal center of the PHENIX interaction region,
and typically are used to trigger on events with minimal bias towards any
particular physics goal. This is important as a means for reconstructing the
relative abundance of particle production, which is as you might expect, crucial
for determination of any inelastic scattering cross section. The Beam-Beam
counters provide us with vertex reconstruction by way of analyzing the time
delay between triggering of the North BBC and the South BBC. The delay window is
then used to reconstruct the event vertex by assuming particles are travelling
at near light speed, Figure~\ref{fig:bbc_vertex_reconstruction}. 

\begin{figure}[ht]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{./figures/bbc_overview}
  \caption{
    Shown: a photograph of the BBC hugging the beryllium beam pipe near the
    center of PHENIX (top left), a schematic showing the relative size and
    location of the BBCs as compared to the rest of PHENIX (top right), and a
    schematic of the exact proportions of the detector as viewed alongside the
    beam pipe (bottom), along with the rapidity and azimuthal
    coverage~\cite{Nakamura2002}
  }
  \label{fig:bbc_overview}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[ht]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{./figures/bbc_vertex_reconstruction}
  \caption{
    A diagram of the general strategy for reconstructing the event z-vertex for
    a collision. Top: a cartoon of the North and South BBCs getting some
    particle penetration after an event. Bottom Right: a characteristic
    distribution of measured z-vertices for a short run taken in
    2002~\cite{Nakamura2002}.
  }
  \label{fig:bbc_vertex_reconstruction}
\end{figure}


\clearpage
\subsubsection{Forward Vertex Detector}

The Forward Vertex Detector, Figure~\ref{fig:forward_vertex_detector} is a
silicon detector, which provides additional tracking to detect secondary event
vertices and additional precision to the Muon Tracking system. This detector can
provide an important additional layer of precision, because it can help to
identify events which do not originate from the primary event vertex of a
collision, so they can be rejected from a pool of candidate $W\rightarrow\mu$
events~\cite{Aidala2014}. The properties of this detector are summarized in
Table~\ref{tab:fvtx_properties}

\begin{table}[ht]
  \centering
  \begin{tabular}{lc}
    \toprule
    \textbf{Property} & \textbf{Value}\\
    \midrule
    Silicon sensor thickness ($\mu$m) &	320\\
    Strip pitch ($\mu$m) &	75\\
    Nominal operating sensor bias (V)	& +70\\
    Strips per column for small, large wedges	& 640, 1664\\
    Inner radius of silicon (mm) &	44.0\\
    Strip columns per half-disk (2 per wedge) &	48\\
    Mean z-position of four stations (mm)	& ±201.1, ±261.4, ±321.7, ±382.0\\
    Silicon mean z offsets from station center (mm) & 	±5.845, ±9.845\\
    \bottomrule
  \end{tabular}
  \caption{
    A brief summary of the FVTX design parameters~\cite{Aidala2014}
  }
  \label{tab:fvtx_properties}
\end{table}

\begin{figure}[ht]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.6\linewidth]{./figures/forward_vertex_detector}
  \caption{
    A schematic of the Forward Vertex Detector, showing the silicon chip layers
    (light blue wedges), and readout electronics (green). They are mounted
    directly onto the Silicon Vertex Detector, which was not used in this
    analysis. The FVTX and SVD together are used in heavy ion
    analyses~\cite{Aidala2014}.
  }
  \label{fig:forward_vertex_detector}
\end{figure}


\clearpage
\subsubsection{The Muon Arms}

The Muon Arms are composed of several subsystems, including the Muon Tracker
(MuTR, cathode strip chambers), the Muon Identifier (MuID, shielding and
scintillation layers), and the Resistive Plate Chambers (RPC(s), bakelite gas
gaps and azimuthal oriented capacitively coupled copper readout strips). The job
of the muon tracker is to identify muons with the penetration through the many
layers of the MuID, and provide momentum and charge reconstruction for muon
tracks. Tracks are matched to the event vertex with Kalman filter during
reconstruction, and can even be matched with FVTX secondary vertices as a means
of rejecting non W-Boson decays. Prior to the Forward Upgrade
(Section~\ref{sec:forward_upgrade}), the muon arms consisted solely of the Muon
Tracker and the MuID. 

The Muon Tracker has a radial magnetic field, leading to charged particles
traversing the tracker to have a helical bend. This was suitable for lower
energy muon tracks, such as muons coming from the J$\Psi$ decay, which was one
of the primary decays targeted in the original design of the muon tracker.

However, these J/$\Psi$ muons have much lower energy then muons which decay from
areal W-Boson production. To extend the muon tracker's usefulness into tracking
these high energy muons, an upgrade to the triggering system was required to
obtain adequate back-ground rejection for the Forward W analysis. The details of
the muon arms will be discussed in the next section.

\clearpage
\section{The Forward Upgrade} 
\label{sec:forward_upgrade}

The muon arms were the subject of significant upgrades from 2011-2013.
New front end electronics were added to improve triggering, and entire new
detector subsystems (The RPCs) were added. The full details of these subsystems
will be discussed in the forthcoming sections (Section~\ref{sec:forward_upgrade}).

One of the main stated physics goals of PHENIX is to constrain the sea-quark
polarization of the proton spin. While this contribution is
expected to be small, it is not because it is expected to be uniformly zero.
Instead, the expectation is that the matter contribution to the quark sea is
strongly positively polarized, while the antimatter contribution is strongly
negatively polarized~\cite{Aidala2005}. Measuring this polarization via $A_L$
(Equation~\ref{eq:w_production_asymmetry}) is the means by which we will
accomplish this. Prior to the Forward Upgrade, we only had results from the
Central $W\rightarrow\mu$ analysis, but to better constrain our models, we
require lower uncertainty in the forward kinematic regime - thus, the Forward
Upgrade.

The first data for this measurement was taken in 2009, and published in 2010
under \cite{Adare2010} and \cite{Okada2010}, but only for central rapidities,
where a clear Jacobean peak could be found in the electron invariant mass
spectrum at 40$GeV$ mass-energy (half the rest mass of the W-Boson). This made
evaluating yields and calculating asymmetries relatively straight-forward. 

However, in forward kinematic regimes, it was very difficult to discriminate
real $W\rightarrow\mu$ from other sources $X\rightarrow\mu$. As one can observe
in Figure~\ref{fig:muon_production_vs_pt}, only at high $p_T$ does the W-boson
signal become dominant. The old muon trigger electronics did not allow
triggering sufficiently close to the W-Boson production threshold to allow for
enough data to be taken. This is because of how the Muon Tracker identifies the
charge and momentum of particles - which is via track bending. As tracks become
very straight (i.e. high $p_T$), the muon tracker struggles to reconstruct the
correct charge and momentum. The original Forward Upgrade called for a nose-cone
calorimeter, which would have helped greatly for particle rejection, but was
canned for budget reasons.

The Forward Upgrade to PHENIX increased the muon triggering threshold from about
2 $GeV$ to 10 $GeV$, enough to insure that all muons produced from W-Boson
decays can be recorded, with no loss of statistics. This of course is not to
say, that these events were recorded without any background processes - the
removal of the muon background was a substantial effort in this analysis,
described in Section~\ref{sec:sbr}.

\begin{figure}[ht]
  \centering
  \begin{subfigure}[b]{0.5\textwidth}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{./figures/w_old_trigger.png}
    \caption{The original Muon Trigger Threshold}
    \label{fig:trig_muon_old}
  \end{subfigure}%
  ~
  \begin{subfigure}[b]{0.5\textwidth}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{./figures/w_dominant_region_new_trigger.png}
    \caption{Muon Trigger Threshold, Forward Upgrade}
    \label{fig:trig_muon_new}
  \end{subfigure}
  \caption{ 
    Observing the simulated production of muon as a function of $p_T$, we can
    see that in the kinematic region of $W$ production that the dominant sources
    of muons come from other processes. The new PHENIX muon trigger threshold is
    sensitive at 10 $GeV/c$ and above. The threshold is still high enough that
    with other methods, we can record all events which come from the W boson,
    with triggering, whereas with the old threshold, this was impossible.
  }
  \label{fig:muon_production_vs_pt}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Muon Tracker Upgrades and Performance}

The primary purpose of the Muon Tracker is to reconstruct the energy and
momentum of muons in the forward kinematic regime. Because the MuID is composed
of larocci tubes sandwiched between solid steel sheets, only particles which
penetrate all the layers of the MuID are identified as muons. The Muon Tracker
has three cathode strip tracking planes in a volume of gas, with an applied
radial magnetic field. Each plane has two faces of tracking strips, for six
total tracking readouts total. The arrangement of cathode strips  makes the Muon
Tracker very sensitive to the azimuthal dimension, but coarsely sensitive to the
radial direction. The Muon Arms have three tracking stations for momentum and
charge identification, sandwiched between two RPCS.

Since the MuID will fire on Muons with a 2.5 $GeV$ momentum threshold, it will
trigger very rapidly at high beam energies and luminosities - too fast to record
all data - event rates were in excess of 10 MHz in 2013, with only 2 kHz of DAQ
bandwidth allocated to the W analysis. Thus, before the Forward Upgrade, the
Muon Arms were insufficient. However, additional absorber was installed at the
nose-cone of the muon tracker to block lower momentum particles. The addition of
the RPCs as well as new Front End Electronics Modules allowed for the real-time
calculation of pseudo-momentum to be fed into the trigger decision in order to
provide high rejection power on tracks. These upgrades allowed us to trigger
exclusively on relatively straight tracks, which is consistent with high
momentum particles~\cite{Fukao2011}.

\begin{figure}[ht]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.8\linewidth]{./figures/new_muon_trigger.png}
  \caption{
    A schematic of the new muon trigger for recording
    W-Bosons~\cite{Fukao2011}
  }
  \label{fig:new_muon_trigger}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[ht]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.8\linewidth]{./figures/muon_arms_upgrades.png}
  \caption{
    The position of the Front-End Electronics upgrades and new RPCs + Absorber
    are shown. Muon tracker stations are shown in blue (along with the front-end
    electronics). The RPCs sandwich the muon tracking stations and the MuID.
    The absorber material sits just inside of the muon arms, before the Forward
    Vertex Detectors and inner tracking stations of the muon
    tracker~\cite{Fukao2011}
  }
  \label{fig:muon_arms_upgrades}

\end{figure}

\clearpage
\subsection{Resistive Plate Chambers and Performance}

One of my major contributions to the PHENIX experiment was in the construction
and testing of the RPCs at station 1, in 2012. An exploded view of the RPC is
shown in Figure~\ref{fig:rpc_exploded}.
\subsubsection{Design}

\begin{figure}[ht]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.7\linewidth]{./figures/rpc_exploded.png}
  \caption{
    We can see the various layers that go into the construction of a typical RPC
    segment installed at PHENIX. A High Voltage bias is applied to the graphite
    coating on either side of bakelite gas-filled gaps. Readout strips are
    positioned between the two bakelite gaps. Finally, the entire double-gap
    structure is surrounded by a copper grounding cage, and wrapped in
    insulating mylar~\cite{Fukao2011}.
  }
  \label{fig:rpc_exploded}

\end{figure}

\begin{table}[ht]
  \centering
  \begin{tabular}{lc}
    \toprule 
    \textbf{Cluster Size} & $<$2 strips \\
    \textbf{Efficiency} & $>$95\% for MIP \\
    \textbf{Time Resolution} & $\sim$2 nanoseconds \\
    \textbf{Rate Capability} & 0.5 kHz/$cm^2$ \\
    \bottomrule
  \end{tabular}
  \caption{
    The design characteristics of the RPCs~\cite{Fukao2011}
  }
  \label{tab:rpc_design_characteristics}
\end{table}
\subsubsection{Construction}

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \begin{subfigure}[b]{0.4\textwidth}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{./figures/rpc1_north_installed}
    \caption{RPC Station 1, North}
    \label{fig:rpc1n}
  \end{subfigure}%
  ~
  \begin{subfigure}[b]{0.4\textwidth}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{./figures/rpc1_south_installed}
    \caption{RPC Station 1, South}
    \label{fig:rpc1s}
  \end{subfigure}
  \caption{
    The North RPC Station 1 is installed on the muon tracker nosecone (left).
    Similarly we see the installation of the south RPC Station 1 (right)
  }
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.7\linewidth]{./figures/mike_in_rpc1}
  \caption{
    lorem ipsum
  }
  \label{fig:mike_in_rpc1}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \begin{subfigure}[b]{0.4\textwidth}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=0.8\linewidth]{./figures/rpc_1_muon_hit}
    \caption{A muon passing through the layers of the RPC}
    \label{fig:rpc_hit_side_view}
  \end{subfigure}%
  ~
  \begin{subfigure}[b]{0.4\textwidth}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=0.8\linewidth]{./figures/rpc_1_muon_hit_side}
    \caption{Copper readout strip activated by passing muon}
    \label{fig:rpc_hit_top_view}
  \end{subfigure}
  \caption{
    As a muon passes through the layers of the RPC (left), the gas in the
    bakelite gap is ionized. This charge migrates and collects near the highly
    resistive graphite coating. An image distribution is induced on the
    overlapping readout strip (right), which is passed along its own channel to
    the front-end electronics.
  }
  \label{fig:muon_hit_rpc}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.7\linewidth]{./figures/rpc1_construction_1}
  \caption{
    lorem ipsum
  }
  \label{fig:rpc1_construction_1}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.7\linewidth]{./figures/rpc1_construction_2}
  \caption{
    lorem ipsum
  }
  \label{fig:rpc1_construction_2}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.7\linewidth]{./figures/rpc1_construction_3}
  \caption{
    lorem ipsum
  }
  \label{fig:rpc1_construction_3}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.7\linewidth]{./figures/rpc1_construction_4}
  \caption{
    lorem ipsum
  }
  \label{fig:rpc1_construction_4}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.7\linewidth]{./figures/rpc1_construction_4b}
  \caption{
    lorem ipsum
  }
  \label{fig:rpc1_construction_4b}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.7\linewidth]{./figures/rpc1_construction_5}
  \caption{
    lorem ipsum
  }
  \label{fig:rpc1_construction_5}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.7\linewidth]{./figures/rpc1_construction_6}
  \caption{
    lorem ipsum
  }
  \label{fig:rpc1_construction_6}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.7\linewidth]{./figures/rpc1_construction_6b}
  \caption{
    lorem ipsum
  }
  \label{fig:rpc1_construction_6b}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.7\linewidth]{./figures/rpc1_construction_7}
  \caption{
    lorem ipsum
  }
  \label{fig:rpc1_construction_7}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.7\linewidth]{./figures/rpc1_construction_8}
  \caption{
    lorem ipsum
  }
  \label{fig:rpc1_construction_8}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.7\linewidth]{./figures/rpc_cosmics_test_stand}
  \caption{
    lorem ipsum
  }
  \label{fig:rpc_cosmics_test_stand}
\end{figure}



\subsubsection{Testing}
\subsubsection{Performance}
\subsection{Triggering and Data Acquisition}
\subsubsection{2013 Data Set Triggers}
