\chapter{Discussion and Conclusion}
\label{ch:conclusion}

\begin{figure}[ht]
	\centering
	\begin{subfigure}[t]{0.5\textwidth}
		\centering
		\includegraphics[width=0.95\linewidth]{./figures/prelim_AL_2bins.pdf}
	\end{subfigure}%
	\begin{subfigure}[t]{0.5\textwidth}
		\centering
		\includegraphics[width=0.95\linewidth]{./figures/prelim_AL_6bins.pdf}
	\end{subfigure}
	\caption{
		Preliminary asymmetries from Run 13, reproduced from
		Figure~\ref{fig:al_preliminary_three_eta} and
		Figure~\ref{fig:al_preliminary_standard}
	}
	\label{fig:asymmetries_preliminary}
\end{figure}

The PHENIX results on the Asymmetry (Figure~\ref{fig:asymmetries_preliminary})
put an important constraint on the polarized parton distribution functions, and
spin contributions of the sea-quarks to the total proton spin. Due to the
kinematic mixing between the quark flavors ($\Delta\bar{u}, \Delta\bar{d}, u,
d$), perfect separation of the quark helicity cannot be achieved. However, as
seen in Figure~\ref{fig:asymmetries_preliminary}, our measurement (red boxed
data points) overlaps the regions of largest uncertainty in the projections in
the asymmetries. These regions of large asymmetry are the dominated by
uncertainties in the anti-quark polarization. In the forward kinematic region,
the asymmetries for the $W-$ give enhanced sensitivity to sea-quark
polarization, whereas the $W+$ contains mixed contributions. Therefore, moving
forward, we expect the NNPDF global fits to the world data set to be improved
with the addition of our data. This gives us a clearer picture of the spin
contribution of the anti-quarks to the total proton spin, but we still need more
data to finalize its contribution.

The future of this analysis in particular depends crucially on our understanding
of the signal to background ratio. The unbinned maximum likelihood fit discussed
in Section~\ref{sec:sbr} has a large associated uncertainty, and in particular,
it is difficult to estimate the probability distribution functions associated
with the hadronic background. Improvements in our understanding of this process
would drastically improve the analysis, but as discussed, simulating this rare
process requires a large amount of computational resources. If the hadronic
background distributions are more similar the signal distributions than
considered originally, then the analyzing power will drop significantly.

Looking forward to the future measurements to help constrain the spin structure
of the proton - the frontier of future measurements lie with the construction of
an electron-ion collider~\cite{Aschenauer2016}. Even with the completion of the
RHIC $W$ physics program, some elements of the light proton sea polarization are
known with little precision - for example - $\Delta\bar{d}-\Delta\bar{u}$.
Strange quarks may also contribute to proton spin in some way, and this
contribution is not well understood. More than anything else, the Electron-Ion
collider will allow for the precise study of the polarized proton structure
function, $g_1(x,Q^2)$ and its scaling violation over a broad range of $x$.
Especially at scales $x < 0.004$ and $Q^2 > 1 GeV^2$, $g1$ is totally
unexplored~\cite{Accardi2012}. Finally, although the longitudinal spin structure
is explored in this thesis, the transverse spin structure must be studied to
obtain a full understanding of the three dimensional spin structure of the
proton.
